# Supplemental Information

## Parsing Dates

Convert a field to a date

DATEPARSE(*format*, *string*)

DATEPARSE(’dd-MMMM-yyyyHH.mm.ss.AAAAA aa’ , [SHIP_DATE])


## Replace a Data Source

1. Open a workbook that refers to the original data source.
2. Select Data > New Data Source and connect to new data source.
3. On Data Source page, drag table to the canvas to set up data source if it’s not done automatically.
4. Go to the sheet tab and select Data > Replace Data Source

## Tableau Preferences

Located in the **Preferences.tps** file.

To add a custom Color Palette in Tableau:

1. Go to My Tableau Repository folder
2. Edit the Preferences.txt file
3. Add preference tags inside the color tags
4. Color palettes are inserted between preferences tags

```
<? xml version='1.0'?>
<workbook>
	<preferences>
		<color-palette name="My Categorical Palette" type="regular">
			<color>#eb912b</color>
			<color>#7099a5</color>
			<color>#c71f34</color>
			<color>#1d437d</color>
			<color>#e8762b</color>
			<color>#5b6591</color>
			<color>#59879b</color>
		</color-palette>
	</preferences>
</workbook>
```

## Rank Sorting

A column of data with a column of generated numbers (1,2,3,4...) from the INDEX() calculation.

When sorting, different results happen because RANK will rank by whatever happens to come first.

## Rank Unique

Assign consecutive values (1,2,3,...) to customer names, with lower values assigned to customers with higher profits: 

RANK_UNIQUE(sum([Profit]),'desc')

Though, since the default order is descending, we can also use:

RANK_UNIQUE(sum([Profit]))

## Stacked Bar Chart

Can create by dragging second dimension on Color in the Marks Card

OR

By dragging second dimension on top of a mark on the View

## Annotating a Bar Graph

Right-click on the bar > Annotate > Mark

## Relationships

Are similar to Outer Joins because they keep all the data whether it matches the primary table or not.

## Dashboards

Can cannot have duplicate sheets added.

## Table Calculations

Find the difference between 'xxxx' and the average sales by sub-category.

*Average sales*

avg_sales_sub = TOTAL(SUM([Sales]))/TOTAL(COUNTD([Sub-Category]))

*Difference from average sales*

SUM([Sales]) - [avg_sales_sub]

Table-scoped expression: {MIN([Order Date])} is essentially the same as {FIXED : MIN([Order Date])}

## Data Highlighters

Data Highlighters can only be applied from a dimension already placed in the view.

## Tableau Bridge

Tableau Bridge helps Tableau Online/Cloud refresh flat files and other local sources

- "Automatically include all output" lets users select to include all output steps of a flow when run on a server

- "Don't send if view is empty" option stops a subscription if no data is found.

- Card Headers can be selected to change grouping or aggregation logic in an aggregate step