# Customize Fields

## Dimensions and Measures

- When a new data source is connected, Tableau auto-assigns **Role** and **Type** to imported data
    - Role: Dimension or Measure
	    - In most cases, this results  in Discrete Dimension or Continuous Measure
		- Can convert back and forth as needed
		- Identified as 'Pills' when in the view
	- Type: string, integer, Date, geographic field, etc.
- Dimensions
    - contain qualitative values used to categorize, segment, and reveal the details in the data
    - form (discrete) headers
	- affect the level of detail in the view; adding dimensions create additional marks
	- CAN be aggregated
- Measures
    - numeric and quantitive values
    - Measures create axes, and are aggregated by default
	- The type of aggregation will vary depending on the type of view
- Color
    - Green = Continuous
	- Blue = Discrete

## Group by Folders

- Group related fields together, like Customer data fields, or Order data fields
- Right-click on field(s) > Group by > Folder

## Continuous and Discrete Fields

- Represented by color
	- Green = Continuous
	- Blue = Discrete
- Continuous fields form axes
- Discrete Dimension fields form headers

## Rename Columns

Rename in 3 different ways. Does NOT affect the original data source.

1. Double-click the field name in the Data Grid in the Data Source Pane
2. Select Manage Metadata, click drop down caret > Rename
3. In the Data Pane in a sheet, right-click > Rename

The original field name can be found via: right-click the field > Describe, under the Remote Column. OR, from the metadata in the Data Source Pane.

## Create Aliases

You can create aliases for dimensions only, NOT measures.

1. Right-click on field in Data Pane > Aliases...
2. Edit Value (Alias)

Labels will now appear differently within Tableau. This doesn't update the original data source.

## Default Properties

- All fields have default properties
    - Comment
	- Color
	- Shape (Dimensions)
	- Sort (Dimensions)
	- Number format (Measures)
	- Aggregation (Measures)
	- Total using... (Measures)




