# Analytics

## Drag and Drop Analytics

From the Analytics Pane, drag and drop statistical methods onto the view, like Trend Lines, Box Plots, Distribution Bands, Forecasts, Clustering, etc.

## Reference Lines, Bands and Distributions

We need at least one continuous field in the view to compute Reference Lines, Bands, and Distributions

- Reference Line
    - a constant or computed value drawn as a continuous line on chart
	- can also include confidence intervals with a reference line
- Reference Bands
    - shade an area behind the marks in the view between two constant or computed values on the axis
	- set starting and ending points
- Reference Distributions
    - When you add a reference distribution, you specific one or more values.
	- One value results in a line.
	- Two or more values result in a set of one or more bands.
	- The distribution can be computed using:
		- **Percentages**
		- **Percentiles**
		- **Quantiles**
		- **Standard Deviation**

*CANNOT select a continuous field that isn't currently in the view as the basis for your reference line, band, or distribution.*

*As a workaround, drag the second Measure to Detail and retry the reference line, etc.*

## Trend Lines

Trend line model types include:
- Linear
- Logarithmic
- Exponential
- Polynomial
- Power

R-Squared, a measure of how well the data fits the linear model. It's the ratio of the variance of the model's error to the total variance of the data. Close to 1 is a good value.

P-Value, the probability that an F random variable with the above degrees of freedom exceeds the observed F in this row of the Analysis of Variance table. The smaller the P-value, the more significant. A value of less than 0.05 is good.

Equation for a linear trend line is: y = mx + c, where m is slope and c is the y-intercept.

Trend lines need both axes to contain values that can be interpreted as numbers. We can't add trends to discrete dimensions, unless they are dates.

A best fit line has an equal number of data points on each side of it.

We can choose which fields to use as factors in the trend line model.

## Forecasting

Create a forecast with at least one date dimension and one measure. However, if date is missing, Tableau could use a different dimension integer in place.

Prediction/confidence intervals include: 90%, 95%, 99%.

Can't add "Outlier %" to the tooltip after creating a forecast.

## Data Highlighter

Toggle data highlighting from the views Legend, clicking the pen/marker icon.

Turn on highlighting for fields by clicking on the pill in the Marks Card > Show Highlighter

Highlighting is different from filtering. Filtering prevents values from appearing in the view. When highlighting, all the values are still in the view, just grayed out.

## Instant Analytics

Ad-hoc analytics, just type-in pills and enter expressions directly in the shelves.

Drag and Drop Analytics, dropping trend lines, reference lines, and forecasts onto the view from the Analytics Pane.

Instant Analytics, selecting marks can instantly compare the subset of population, like recalculating averages, trends, etc.

New Calculation Editor, interactive calculations update the viz in real time.

LOD Expressions, computes multiple levels of aggregation within the same viz.

## Statistical Summary Card

In the tool bar, click the Show/Hide Cards icon on the right and select Summary.

Includes details on each field:
- Count (of all marks)
- SUM
- AVG
- Min
- Max
- Median

Selecting marks on the view will recalculate statistical summaries.
