# Calculations

Calculated fields allow us to create new data (column) from data that already exists in the data source.

Calculated fields can:
- segment data
- convert date types
- aggregate data
- filter results
- calculate ratios
- and more!

Calculation types:
- **Basic calculations**, transform values at the data source level or the visualization level
- **Level of Detail (LOD) expressions**, can be performed at a more granular level (INCLUDE) or less granular (EXCLUDE), or independent level (FIXED)
- **Table Calculations**, transform values at the visualization level only

Calculation building block:
- **Functions**, states used to transform values
- **Fields**, dimensions or measures from your data
- **Operators**, symbols that denote the operation
- **Literal Expressions**, constant values

## String Functions

Common string functions:

LEN(string), returns the number of characters in the string

CONTAINS(string, substring), returns True/False if string contains substring

STARTSWITH(string, substring), returns True/False if string starts with substring

ENDSWITH(string, substring), returns True/False if string ends with substring

LEFT(string, num_chars), returns the number of characters from specified string from the left

UPPER/LOWER(string), returns the string converted to all upper/lowercase characters

SPLIT(string, delimiter, token number), splits a string by the delimiter and returning the specified token from token number

## Date Functions

Commonly used date functions:

MONTH(date), returns the month part, as an integer, from the date input

TODAY(), returns the current date

DATEDIFF(date_part, start_date, end_date, [start_of_week]), returns the difference between two dates expressed in units of date_part. If start_of_week is not included, determined automatically from data source

## Type Conversion

Changing the data type of a field using a calculation. Useful for some things like postal codes, which are geocodes by default.

Examples:

STR([Postal Code])

INT(-9.7) = -9

## IF ELSE

Define own logic and returning custom output.

IF SUM([Profit]) > 10000 THEN "INCREDIBLE!"
ELSEIF SUM([Pofit]) < 0 THEN "AWFUL!"
ELSE "OKAY"
END

## CASE WHEN

Similar to IF/ELSE statements.

CASE [Segment]
WHEN "Consumer" THEN "CO"
WHEN "Corporate" THEN "CP"
WHEN "Home Office" THEN "HO"
ELSE "NOT FOUND"
END

## Ad-hoc Calculations

Calculation that you create and update on the shelf. Also known as type-in or in-line calculations.

Good for insights and exploration:
- testing a hunch
- trying what-if scenarios
- debugging a complex calculation

Three ways to create:
- Double-click on the empty shelf to create a new calculation
- Double-click on an existing pill in the shelf to start editing
- Right-click on the pill > Edit in Shelf

Creating an ad-hoc calculation does not create a new field. But you can drag the ad-hoc pill onto the Data Pane.

If Tableau determines the expression represents a number, it automatically adds aggregation, which shows as AGG(...)

Only one ad-calculation can be open at a time.

The AVG function ignores null values.

They are **not supported** on the Filters or Pages shelves. They also **CANNOT** be used with groups, sets, hierarchies, or parameters.

## Adding Totals

With a Cross Tab of data, add totals via:

Analysis Menu > Totals > Show Row/Column Grand Totals

Clicking and dragging to select cells will auto sum values in the popup.

## Quick Table Calculations

Quick calculations based on table values in the view.

Right-click a pill in the Marks Field > Quick Table Calculation > choose from:
- Running Total
- Difference
- Percent Difference
- Rank
- Percentile
- Moving Average
- YTD Total (need Date dimension in view)
- Compound Growth Rate (need Date dimension in view)
- Year Over Year Growth (need Date dimension in view)
- YTD Growth (need Date dimension in view)

Compute Using:
- Table (across)
- Table (down)
- Table
- Pane (down)
- Pane
- Cell
- Category
- Region
- Sub-category

Can be useful with Pie Charts, applying a Percent of Total.

Standard Deviation is **NOT** a quick table calculation. The Data Pane does **NOT** offer a way to add totals to the view. SUM is **NOT** a table calculation, it's an aggregation.

## View Level of Detail

Whenever you drag a dimension onto the view, the level of detail changes (increases). When dropped on the Rows/Columns shelf, or Color on the Marks Card.

Table calculations allow you to transform values at the level of detail in the visualization only.

Typically, measures do **NOT** affect the granularity.

## Fixed LOD Expressions

See [documentation](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/calculations_calculatedfields_lod.htm)

Level of Detail expressions (LOD Expressions) allow you to compute values at the data source level and the visualization level.

They give you more control over the level of granularity you want to compute:
- more granular (INCLUDE)
- less granular (EXCLUDE)
- independent level (FIXED)

**FIXED**, can compute values without referencing dimension in the view. Good when filtering out states but we still want to see percent of total, etc.
- {FIXED [Region] : SUM([Sales])}

**INCLUDE**, will compute values using the specified dimensions in addition to whatever dimensions are in the view. Example, when you want to average sales per customer per region.

With the Region on Columns, and AVG(Sales) and AVG([INCLUDE calc]) on rows... will compute by Region...
- {INCLUDE [Customer Name] : SUM([Sales])}

**EXCLUDE**, will compute values without the specified dimension in the expression. Good for "percent of total" or "difference from overall average".

With the Region and SUM(Sales) on Columns, and Month on Rows, we can color bar charts by ignoring the Region
- {EXCLUDE [Region] : SUM([Sales])}

LOD expressions can create dimensions OR measures.

INCLUDE and EXCLUDE always create measures.

