# Dashboards

View multiple sheets in one view

Dashboard Pane and Layout Pane

**Dashboard Pane**

Default
- default device, with device preview button

Size
- set view behavior
    - Fixed, size doesn't change
	- Automatic, auto size based on device, poor performance
	    - best to use Tiled Dashboard Layout
	- Range, min and max width
- set view size
    - desktop, mobile
	- common paper sizes
	- custom size

Sheets
- drag sheets onto view
    - used sheets get a green check mark
	- cannot use same sheet twice

## Dashboard Actions

Remove the scrollbar by clicking the Standard fit > Entire View

Create
- Dashboard > Actions... > Add Action
    - Filter
	- Highlight
	- Go to URL
	- Go to Sheet
	- Change Parameter
	- Change Set Values

Actions are run on:
- Hover
- Select
- Menu

Can choose Source Sheets and Target Sheets

Filter Actions, can also be created by clicking the Funnel Icon (Use as Filter) on each each.

Leave the Filter option will continue to show filtered results even if view is cleared.

In the Dashboard, Highlighting and Highlighting Actions can help us easily find data of interest while remaining within the context, see other marks with shared attributes, find related data across sheets.

## Creating Stories

A story is a sequence of visualizations that work together to convey information. Similar to a PowerPoint presentation.

Stories tell a narrative, composed of sheets and dashboards, one at a time.

Create new Story Point
- from Blank or Duplicate
- each item can have a Caption.
- text labels can be added to each story point
	- Drag to add text

Navigation can be set to:
- Caption boxes
- Numbers
- Dots
- Arrows only

## Dashboard Design

Always focus on perfecting the dashboard in default layout. All other device layouts inherit from this layout.

Size - Phone
- "Fit Width" option is recommended for phone sizes
- Option to Auto-Generate layout to reflect any changes to the Default dashboard
- the "optimize layout" will remove white space and optimize the placement of filters.

Device Preview toolbar
- Select the device type
- Select the model
- Toggle landscape/portrait icon

Possible to manually edit phone layout. Can remove items. Can also rearrange items.

The Item Hierarchy shows how the layout is constructed; vertical and horizontal containers.

## Visual Best Practices

Key to developing informative visualization that drives audience to act.

**Audience**, best visualizations have a clear purpose and work for intended audience. Know your audience and what you are trying to communicate.

**Context**, make sure views include context; titles, captions, unites, and commentary help understand the data better.

**Chart Choice**, should depend on the question we are answering.

**Layout**, the design should help guide the reader's eye through multiple view while telling the story of each insight.
- Newspaper or Z-layout, most important is put on top left
- White space, adding space and padding delineates sections
- Size, more important items should be larger
- Device type, device-specific dashboards help optimize viewing experience

**Color**, the correct color is critical for producing coherent and impactful data stories.
- Manage color choices, primary colors should be neutral
- color types, know when to use sequential, diverging, categorical, highlighting, and alerting color motifs
- Consistency, design should be consistent
- Accessibility, account for color blindness in the design process

**Titles & Subtitles**, make dashboard more digestible, subtitles can describe how to interact with the worksheet/dashboard

**Tooltips**, help guide the audience by highlighting important information. Customize tooltips to make them more effective.

**Fonts**, make sure text is readable. Consider size, boldness, and color.

**Dashboard Size**, is set to fixed by default.

**Dashboard Interactivity**, engage the audience with dashboard actions and other dynamic things.

**Design For Performance**, keep things simple. Just include data/things you need. Impacted by:
- visual design, how many elements and such
- calculations
- queries
- data connections, slow database?
- hardware configuration for Tableau Server

**Accessibility**, make views accessible to as many people as possible. Make sure design adheres to Web Content Accessibility guidelines (WCAG 2.0 AA)


## Publishing Options

Tableau Public
- Server Menu > Tableau Public > Save to Tableau Public...
- Will need to sign in
- Do not publish sensitive data or dashboards to Tableau Public

Tableau Server/Online
- Server Menu > Sign in...
- Log in
- Choose Project, Name, description, Tags, Sheets, Permissions, Data Sources, etc...

If Tableau Desktop is slow, Tableau Server/Online will be even slower. Limit the number of marks/views/unused fields you use.

Publish the data source
- Server Menu > Publish Data Source > select data source

Hidden Fields remain hidden when published

**Show Sheets as Tabs**, tick box that provides tab-based navigation

**Show selections**, option to highlight a particular portion of the view when others open the workbook

**Include External Files**, to bundle information that's not available to others when you publish

## Sharing Options

Tableau Packaged Workbook
- File > Export Packaged Workbook...
- contains worksheets, dashboards and data source
- .twbx file

Power Point
- File > Export as PowerPoint
- exports, This View, or specific sheets from dashboard/workbook
- filters are not interactive, static views only

Tableau Online
- File > Share...

Image
- Dashboard Menu > Export Image...
- .png, .jpg, .SVG
- also, right-click on dashboard > Copy > Image...
- possible to not include Legend

Workbook
- File > Export as Version...
- older version of Tableau

Print to PDF







