# Data Connections

## Tableau Server/Online/Cloud

Tableau Cloud is the *New and Improved!* Tableau Online.
- fully-hosted, cloud-based, enterprise-grade analytics platform
- can ask questions directly in the browser (AI driven)
- share and collaborate online
- give different people different access to content

Tableau Server is a self-governed Tableau instance. 

Sign in
- Server Menu > Sign In...

Connect to online data sources; everyone with the necessary read permissions can access corresponding data.

## Connect to Data Sources

Search for Data
- Tableau Server, will ask to authenticate

To a File
- Excel, spreadsheet data
- Text File, like .CSV
- JSON
- PDF, Tableau will read table on specified pages
- Spatial file, 
- Statistical file
- More...

To a Server
- MySQL
- Oracle
- Amazon Redshift
- PostgreSQL
- More (50+)

When connecting to a database, you can write custom SQL to select only the required data.

When connecting to a local file, Live is the default connection

Tableau will Preview 1,000 rows of data when first connected to a data source


## Metadata Grid

Contains metadata for each table. Can assign aliases to fields. Change data types. Split, group, describe...

Changes do not affect original dataset.

You can see the original (Remote) field name.

Will also show metadata about joins and relationships, what fields are related. Performance Options exist for Cardinality and Referential Integrity.

View hidden fields. See original field name. See what table a field belongs to.

## Splitting Fields

String fields that contain multiple items can be split into separate fields. Split or Custom Split works.

In the Data Source window, right-click on a field > Split. This will auto split on space if its "firstname lastname". Will show as a calculated field in the Data Pane on sheets.

Custom Split allows you to use a custom separator and split off first/last/all columns.

Splitting fields is basically just using calculated field equations to trim and split.

## Data Interpreter

Data often needs cleaning for analyzing. Tableau's Data Interpreter can help automate and fix simple problems.

In Data Source window, click Use Data Interpreter checkbox.

Click > Review Results to review an Excel file that describes how Tableau cleaned the data.
- Red, interpreted as column header
- Green, interpreted as values
- White, data is ignored
- Red border, data has been excluded from your data source

After the pivot, **2 new fields** are created:
- Pivot field names
- Pivot field values

Original columns **are replaced**.

It's possible to add more data to the pivot.
- select another column
- click the drop-down caret icon > Add Data to Pivot

Always a good idea to review results to make sure important data points have not been excluded.

**Pivot Data**, converting data or columns from a crosstab format into a columnar format. Will make aggregation easier when analyzing data.
1. select all columns in Tableau data grid
2. right-click > Pivot
3. rename fields as needed

The Data Interpreter is not available when:
- the data source is already in a format that Tableau can interpret
- too many rows or columns
    - more than 2000 columns
	- more than 3000 rows and 150 columns
- the data source is not supported
    - only works for MS Excel (.xls or .xlsx), .CSV, PDF, and Google Sheets.

## Joining Data

A method used to combine data based on common fields. The result of combining is a virtual table that is extended horizontally with added columns.
- must be in the logical layer in the Relationship canvas
- common fields must have the same data type
- published data sources cannot be used in joins
- fields used in join cannot be removed without breaking join

Join types:
- inner, matching data in left and right, most common
- Left, all left table data and matching right
- Right, all right table data and matching left
- Full Outer, combines all

Create join:
1. drag first field to canvas
2. double-click it to open physical layer
3. drag another field into it
4. configure join
5. close join dialog

Joins may improve performance in some situations. However, relationships are recommended over joins. They preserve the original table's level of detail when combining information.

A Union, is technically **NOT** a join.

It is possible to create non-equivalent joins, such as less than (<) and not equal (<>), so they're not limited to just equality (=).

Joins combine data into **NEW table** and discards the original tables.

## Spatial Files

Contain geographic data.

Tableau can connect to:
- Shapefiles
- MapInfo tables
- KML (Keyhole Markup Language) files
- GeoJSON
- TopoJSON
- Esri File Geodatabases

Spatial and any relevant corresponding files need to be in same folder.

Look for the Field that has the geography icon when loading data and drag that onto the view. If marks appear as only 1, go to:
- Analysis > Uncheck Aggregate Measures

Might need to join spatial data with other data sources, like demographic/economic/environmental data, and so on.

When joining two Spatial Files together, you get "intersects" instead of '=' on the two sources.

## Join Calculations

Can join on "create join calculation". Allows you to create a calculated field, then join on that.

Be sure to make field types the same; string/integers.

## Relationships

- Dynamic way of combining data from multiple tables for analysis. 
- Defines how two tables relate to each other.
- Does **NOT** merge them.
- Tables remain distinct
- More powerful than joins, and recommended over them

Tableau Data Model
- all data sources have underlying data model
- the data model has 2 layers: logical and physical layers
- Logical Layer: where you combine data using relationships (noodles)
- Physical Layer, where you combine data using joins and unions (Venn diagram)

Logical Layer (Relationships)
- relationships canvas in the Data Source page
- fields default to logical tables when dropped onto canvas
- level of detail is at the row level of the logical table
- logical tables remain distinct (normalized), not merged
- every logical table has at least one physical table
- multiple tables at different levels of detail are supported in single data source
- unmatched values are **NOT** dropped
- avoids data duplication
- only creates queries relevant to the view
- automatic, no up-front join type
- context-aware
- flexible, Tableau only queries the data it needs for each viz

Physical Layer (Joins)
- Join/union canvas in the Data Source page
- tables here are physical tables that are joined or union
- double-click a logical table to see its physical tables
- level of detail is at the row level of merged physical tables
- physical tables are merged into a single, flat table
- can duplicated values

Early versions of Tableau only had 'join'.

## Unions

Union data whenever you wish to append values (rows) from one table to anther.

Joins increases columns, Unions increase rows

When data source supports union, the **New Union** button appears on the left pane of the Data Source page.

**Wildcard Search**, uses a sequence or pattern to search data sources to union data.
- *2020, tables ending in '2020'

When field names do not match, both columns are used but contain null values. Non-matching fields can be merged into one with the 'merge option' to remove null values.

## Blending

A method for combining data from multiple sources. They never truly combine data. Data sources are queried independently, then aggregated, and presented in the view. So then, combine data is never saved anywhere; only exists in the view.

Blends can work with different levels of detail and working with published data sources. Also good for combining an Excel and a .CSV as a primary and secondary data source.

- Blue, primary data source
- Orange, secondary data source, and contains join links to edit

First data source that gets added is the primary (Blue)

Blends make use of Left joins; aggregates, then combines the data. Whereas, joins combines data, then aggregates.

Different sheets can make use of different Blends.

Multiple corresponding values in the rows results in an asterisk (*) in the view.

## Extracts

Saved subsets of the data.
- can improve performance
- take advantage of functions not available with original data, like distinct counts
- work offline
- supports large data sets, billions of rows

Full refresh or incremental refresh options

Extracts use the .hyper file format. Older version were .tde.
- create larger extracts
- create and refresh extracts faster
- better performance when interacting with views that use extracts

Create extract
- click the Extract radio button when connecting to data in the Data Source page
	- options to Filter
	- select how much data to extract
	- aggregations
	- number of rows (top N/sample)

If working with an Extract, the data source icon on Sheets will appear with the 2 cylinders icon.

**Multiple Tables**

There's an option to store extract with "Multiple tables", which mirrors a database structure. This could potentially lead to smaller extract file sizes, faster extract creation, and faster queries. 

If the number of rows in the extract is bigger than the individual data tables, storing with the Multiple Table Storage options is recommended.

**When to Join or Blend?**

Asses the following:
- How many connection you have in the workbook
- How the data in each source is related
- The number of records you have in the data
- The types of views you will need to create

In most scenarios, traditional table joins are best.

- Tables from different data sources can usually be joined in a cross-database join
- If data is published data, extract-only data sources, and can't create a local copy of data, blends will have to work in place of joins
- If secondary table is large, data blending may be faster
- Table joins are better with 1:1 relationships. 1:many or many:many relationships create duplicated data after joins, Data Blending can be better
- Blending only occurs as a LEFT join

First, try joins or cross-database joins first before Blending.

Limit data sources to the fewest number of tables possible.

